Release Notes

13.2.20170117

Πνευματικά Δικαιώματα © 2007 Κώστας Μπουκουβάλας quantis@hellug.gr

Πνευματικά Δικαιώματα © 2012, 2013 Ευστάθιος Ιωσηφίδης iosifidis@opensuse.org
2011

Περίληψη

openSUSE is a free and Linux-based operating system for your PC, Laptop or
Server. You can surf the web, manage your e-mails and photos, do office work,
play videos or music and have a lot of fun!

━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

Πίνακας Περιεχομένων

Εγκατάσταση

    Live CD Installer and Keyboard Settings
    Network After an Update With YaST
    Warning: No Location for Bootloader Stage1 Selected
    BtrFS and Windows XP
    Unbranded Grub2 on New Installs From Live
    NET Installation Using Wifi

Γενικά

    UEFI—Unified Extensible Firmware Interface
    Κατατμήσεις UEFI, GPT, και MS-DOS
    Booting When in Secure Boot Mode

Αναβάθμιση Συστήματος
Τεχνικά

    Garbage on the Screen During Installation with the Nouveau Driver
    Information About the FGLRX Driver
    Second Static Mouse Pointer
    Missing Dependencies for virt-manager
    Modem Authorization After Suspend
    Package Search Missing in GTK UI of YaST
    openSUSE pre-13.2 cifstab Migration
    Removing openSUSE 13.1 KDE Wallpaper After Upgrade
    MATE Desktop official integration
    Slow Start-up in GNOME
    Ρυθμίσεις AppArmor και Δικαιωμάτων

Διάφορα

    YaST (Qt GUI): "Service Manager" Icon Appears Twice

Περισσότερες πληροφορίες και ανατροφοδότηση

The end of the maintenance period for openSUSE 13.2 is now reached. To keep
your systems up to date and secure, migrate to a current openSUSE version.

For more information about upgrading to a current openSUSE version, see http://
en.opensuse.org/SDB:Distribution-Upgrade. Make sure that all maintenance
updates for openSUSE 13.2 are applied before starting the update.

Εάν αναβαθμίζετε από μία παλιότερη έκδοση σε αυτή την έκδοση openSUSE, δείτε
τις προηγούμενες σημειώσεις έκδοσης που βρίσκονται εδώ: http://en.opensuse.org/
openSUSE:Release_Notes

Εγκατάσταση

Live CD Installer and Keyboard Settings

The Live CD installer presents a problem related with the keyboard settings. If
the user changes from the QWERTY keyboard layout (the default en-US variant),
this setting will not be properly applied, and the new system will stay with a
QWERTY pre-configuration.

As a workaround, use the localectl command-line tool after the installation.
For example (to install a German keyboard layout):

localectl set-x11-keymap de pc105 nodeadkeys

This issue is not present in the DVD Installer.

Network After an Update With YaST

After updating from 13.1 to 13.2 using YaST, there are good chances that the
new Wicked network method is running together with the old NetworkManager, if
you are using a laptop with a wifi connection.

To solve this, first disable Wicked and enable again NetworkManager:

systemctl is-active network.service && systemctl stop network.service
systemctl is-active wickedd.service && systemctl stop wickedd.service
systemctl disable wicked.service
systemctl --force enable NetworkManager.service
systemctl start network.service

Then check whether the currently selected service is actually NetworkManager:

systemctl -p Id show network.service

And update /etc/resolv.conf:

netconfig update

Or reboot after the systemctl commands to restart also wpa_suplicant.

Warning: No Location for Bootloader Stage1 Selected

During the initial installation, in the summary view of YaST, a warning as
follows can appear bellow the bootloader section: «Warning: No location for
bootloader stage1 selected. Unless you know what are you doing please select
above location.»

This warning is a bug in YaST (now fixed in Factory) and you can safely ignore
it.

BtrFS and Windows XP

If you have Windows XP and want to install openSUSE 13.2 with BtrFS, an error
message in YaST will inform you about problems during the bootloader
installation.

The safest option is to install in a partition with Ext4 instead of BtrFS.
There is a fix that will reach Factory soon, but will be not present for 13.2.

Unbranded Grub2 on New Installs From Live

A bug in YaST prevents the branding in GRUB2 bootloader when installed from the
LiveCD medium. Note, the preferred way to install openSUSE 13.2 is using the
DVD or the NET install. Both mediums generate a proper branded bootloader
during the installation.

NET Installation Using Wifi

Performing the NET install using Wifi presents some problems in YaST. Fixing
this is work in progress and will be soon available. Meanwhile the only option
is to use a wire connection to complete the NET installation.

Γενικά

UEFI—Unified Extensible Firmware Interface

Prior to installing openSUSE on a system that boots using UEFI (Unified
Extensible Firmware Interface), you are urgently advised to check for any
firmware updates the hardware vendor recommends and, if available, to install
such an update. A pre-installed Windows 8 is a strong indication that your
system boots using UEFI.

Background: Some UEFI firmware has bugs that cause it to break if too much data
gets written to the UEFI storage area. Nobody really knows how much "too much"
is, though. openSUSE minimizes the risk by not writing more than the bare
minimum required to boot the OS. The minimum means telling the UEFI firmware
about the location of the openSUSE boot loader. Upstream Linux Kernel features
that use the UEFI storage area for storing boot and crash information (pstore)
have been disabled by default. Nevertheless, it is recommended to install any
firmware updates the hardware vendor recommends.

Κατατμήσεις UEFI, GPT, και MS-DOS

Together with the EFI/UEFI specification, a new style of partitioning arrived:
GPT (GUID Partition Table). This new schema uses globally unique identifiers
(128-bit values displayed in 32 hexadecimal digits) to identify devices and
partition types.

Additionally, the UEFI specification also allows legacy MBR (MS-DOS)
partitions. The Linux boot loaders (ELILO or GRUB2) try to automatically
generate a GUID for those legacy partitions, and write them to the firmware.
Such a GUID can change frequently, causing a rewrite in the firmware. A rewrite
consist of two different operation: removing the old entry and creating a new
entry that replaces the first one.

Modern firmware has a garbage collector that collects deleted entries and frees
the memory reserved for old entries. A problem arises when faulty firmware does
not collect and free those entries; this may end up with a non-bootable system.

The workaround is simple: convert the legacy MBR partition to the new GPT to
avoid this problem completely.

Booting When in Secure Boot Mode

Αυτό επηρεάζει μόνο μηχανήματα σε κατάσταση UEFI με ενεργοποιημένη ασφαλή
εκκίνηση.

The new version of the shim loader allows more machines to boot with Secure
Boot enabled than with openSUSE 13.1. Nevertheless, in case of trouble, first
update the BIOS of your machine to the latest version. If the BIOS update does
not help, report the model of your machine to the wiki (http://en.opensuse.org/
openSUSE:UEFI). Then we can track it for the next release.

Αναβάθμιση Συστήματος

Τεχνικά

Garbage on the Screen During Installation with the Nouveau Driver

Σε μερικά συστήματα με κάρτες NVIDIA, ο εγκαταστάτης πιθανό να μην εμφανίζει
σωστά το επάνω μέρος της οθόνης λόγω προβλημάτων με τον οδηγό nouveau. Εάν σας
επηρεάζει το πρόβλημα, μπορείτε να απενεργοποιήσετε το άρθρωμα πυρήνα nouveau
ώστε να εκτελέσετε τον εγκαταστάτη και μετά να το ενεργοποιήσετε ξανά μόλις το
σύστημα εγκατασταθεί ή αναβαθμιστεί.

To disable the kernel module, once you boot from the installation media, select
the 'Installation' entry in grub and press 'e' to edit the parameters. Then go
to the line starting with 'linux' (or 'linuxefi') and add brokenmodules=nouveau
at the end. Now press F10 to continue booting with the new parameter. After the
system is installed, you can re-enable the nouveau module by editing /etc/
modprobe.d/50-blacklist.conf and removing the entry that blacklists nouveau.

Information About the FGLRX Driver

For more information about the AMD FGLRX drivers in openSUSE 13.2 and its
status, see https://lizards.opensuse.org/2014/11/01/
fglrx-warning-opensuse-13-2-tumbleweed/.

Second Static Mouse Pointer

If you see two mouse pointers and have two graphic boards, where one is an
Intel board, try uninstalling xf86-video-intel and thus using the other one
only. This will make disappear the static mouse pointer.

This and other issues with the Intel driver like (see http://
bugzilla.opensuse.org/show_bug.cgi?id=901506) will be worked on and, if
possible, addressed with an online update.

Missing Dependencies for virt-manager

If you find a problem executing virt-manager, try installing
typelib-1_0-Gtk-3_0, typelib-1_0-SpiceClientGtk-3_0 and typelib-1_0-GtkVnc-2_0.

In the online update there will be a new version with those dependencies made
explicit.

Modem Authorization After Suspend

openSUSE 13.2 is a more strict in security tha 13.1. If you are connected via a
UMTS or 3G modem and you suspend the machine, the system will ask you for the
root password before reconnecting.

You can change this behavior changing a line in /etc/
polkit-default-privs.standard:

# ModemManager
org.freedesktop.ModemManager.Device.Control    auth_admin:auth_admin:yes


with:

# ModemManager
org.freedesktop.ModemManager.Device.Control    auth_admin_keep


Package Search Missing in GTK UI of YaST

The GTK interface of YaST does not feature a package search box. So if you are
in GNOME or XFCE and you need this feature, use QT interface instead:

sudo /sbin/yast2 --qt

openSUSE pre-13.2 cifstab Migration

Mounting cifs shares at systems start via /etc/samba/cifstab has been
discontinued and obsoleted. Now the generic /etc/fstab handles it.

The migration process requires two steps:

 1. Append all your mount points from /etc/samba/cifstab.rpmsave to /etc/fstab.

 2. Add 0 0 to the end of each new cifs mount line in /etc/fstab.

For more information and examples, see /usr/share/doc/packages/cifs-utils/
README.cifstab.migration in the installed system.

Removing openSUSE 13.1 KDE Wallpaper After Upgrade

If the openSUSE 13.1 KDE Wallpaper still appears after the system upgrade,
remove it from the user cache manually:

rm ~/.kde4/cache-*/plasma-wallpapers/usr/share/wallpapers/openSUSEdefault/contents/images/*

MATE Desktop official integration

The MATE desktop is now officially available under openSUSE 13.2 with MATE
version 1.8.1, the latest stable release. It provides an intuitive and
attractive desktop environment using traditional metaphors for Linux and other
Unix-like operating systems.

The objective, for openSUSE, is to provide the same experience users had when
they used GNOME under openSUSE 11.4, with the main-menu and the Sonar theme.

Slow Start-up in GNOME

GNOME autologin can cause a slow boot process. Probably there is a race between
services not correctly marked to depend on each other. Until the fix will be
available as an online update, a workaround is to temporarily disable the GNOME
autologin feature.

Ρυθμίσεις AppArmor και Δικαιωμάτων

AppArmor is enabled by default. This means more security, but might prevent
services from working if you run them in unexpected ways. If you encounter
strange permission problems, try to switch the AppArmor profile for the
affected service to complain mode with:

aa-complain /usr/bin/$your_service

Complain mode means: allow everything, and log things that the profile would
not allow.

Even if it helps, report it as a bug! We want to fix AppArmor profiles to also
cover corner cases.

Διάφορα

YaST (Qt GUI): "Service Manager" Icon Appears Twice

In the System section of YaST (Qt GUI) the icon Service Manager appears twice.
There is a bug in the Qt version of the YaST Control Center that does not honor
the «hidden» flag in the desktop files.

This will get fixed with the next YaST online update.

Περισσότερες πληροφορίες και ανατροφοδότηση

  • Read the READMEs on the CDs.

  • Get detailed changelog information about a particular package from the RPM:

    rpm --changelog -qp <FILENAME>.rpm

    Το <FILENAME>. είναι το όνομα του RPM.

  • Check the ChangeLog file in the top level of the DVD for a chronological
    log of all changes made to the updated packages.

  • Για περισσότερες πληροφορίες δείτε στον κατάλογο docu στο DVD.

  • https://activedoc.opensuse.org/ contains additional or updated
    documentation.

  • Visit http://www.opensuse.org for the latest product news from openSUSE.

Πνευματική ιδιοκτησία © 2014 SUSE LLC

Thanks for using openSUSE.

The openSUSE Team.

