Release Notes

13.2.20170117

خلاصة

openSUSE is a free and Linux-based operating system for your PC, Laptop or
Server. You can surf the web, manage your e-mails and photos, do office work,
play videos or music and have a lot of fun!

━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

قائمة المحتويات

التثبيت

    Live CD Installer and Keyboard Settings
    Network After an Update With YaST
    Warning: No Location for Bootloader Stage1 Selected
    BtrFS and Windows XP
    Unbranded Grub2 on New Installs From Live
    NET Installation Using Wifi

عام

    UEFI—واجهة البرنامج الثابت الممتد
    UEFI، GPT، وأقسام MS-DOS
    الإقلاع عندما تكون في وضع الإقلاع الأمن

ترقية النظام
تقني

    البيانات المهملة على الشاشة أثناء عملية التثبيت مع سواقة Nouveau
    Information About the FGLRX Driver
    Second Static Mouse Pointer
    Missing Dependencies for virt-manager
    Modem Authorization After Suspend
    Package Search Missing in GTK UI of YaST
    openSUSE pre-13.2 cifstab Migration
    Removing openSUSE 13.1 KDE Wallpaper After Upgrade
    MATE Desktop official integration
    Slow Start-up in GNOME
    AppArmor and وإعدادات الأذونات

منوعات

    YaST (Qt GUI): "Service Manager" Icon Appears Twice

مزيد من المعلومات والعتليقات

The end of the maintenance period for openSUSE 13.2 is now reached. To keep
your systems up to date and secure, migrate to a current openSUSE version.

For more information about upgrading to a current openSUSE version, see http://
en.opensuse.org/SDB:Distribution-Upgrade. Make sure that all maintenance
updates for openSUSE 13.2 are applied before starting the update.

إذا قمت بالترقية من إصدار قديم إلى هذا الإصدار openSUSE، انظر ملاحظات الإصدار
السابق المدرجة هنا: http://en.opensuse.org/openSUSE:Release_Notes

التثبيت

Live CD Installer and Keyboard Settings

The Live CD installer presents a problem related with the keyboard settings. If
the user changes from the QWERTY keyboard layout (the default en-US variant),
this setting will not be properly applied, and the new system will stay with a
QWERTY pre-configuration.

As a workaround, use the localectl command-line tool after the installation.
For example (to install a German keyboard layout):

localectl set-x11-keymap de pc105 nodeadkeys

This issue is not present in the DVD Installer.

Network After an Update With YaST

After updating from 13.1 to 13.2 using YaST, there are good chances that the
new Wicked network method is running together with the old NetworkManager, if
you are using a laptop with a wifi connection.

To solve this, first disable Wicked and enable again NetworkManager:

systemctl is-active network.service && systemctl stop network.service
systemctl is-active wickedd.service && systemctl stop wickedd.service
systemctl disable wicked.service
systemctl --force enable NetworkManager.service
systemctl start network.service

Then check whether the currently selected service is actually NetworkManager:

مُعرف systemctl -p يعرض network.service

And update /etc/resolv.conf:

netconfig update

Or reboot after the systemctl commands to restart also wpa_suplicant.

Warning: No Location for Bootloader Stage1 Selected

During the initial installation, in the summary view of YaST, a warning as
follows can appear bellow the bootloader section: “Warning: No location for
bootloader stage1 selected. Unless you know what are you doing please select
above location.”

This warning is a bug in YaST (now fixed in Factory) and you can safely ignore
it.

BtrFS and Windows XP

If you have Windows XP and want to install openSUSE 13.2 with BtrFS, an error
message in YaST will inform you about problems during the bootloader
installation.

The safest option is to install in a partition with Ext4 instead of BtrFS.
There is a fix that will reach Factory soon, but will be not present for 13.2.

Unbranded Grub2 on New Installs From Live

A bug in YaST prevents the branding in GRUB2 bootloader when installed from the
LiveCD medium. Note, the preferred way to install openSUSE 13.2 is using the
DVD or the NET install. Both mediums generate a proper branded bootloader
during the installation.

NET Installation Using Wifi

Performing the NET install using Wifi presents some problems in YaST. Fixing
this is work in progress and will be soon available. Meanwhile the only option
is to use a wire connection to complete the NET installation.

عام

UEFI—واجهة البرنامج الثابت الممتد

Prior to installing openSUSE on a system that boots using UEFI (Unified
Extensible Firmware Interface), you are urgently advised to check for any
firmware updates the hardware vendor recommends and, if available, to install
such an update. A pre-installed Windows 8 is a strong indication that your
system boots using UEFI.

Background: Some UEFI firmware has bugs that cause it to break if too much data
gets written to the UEFI storage area. Nobody really knows how much "too much"
is, though. openSUSE minimizes the risk by not writing more than the bare
minimum required to boot the OS. The minimum means telling the UEFI firmware
about the location of the openSUSE boot loader. Upstream Linux Kernel features
that use the UEFI storage area for storing boot and crash information (pstore)
have been disabled by default. Nevertheless, it is recommended to install any
firmware updates the hardware vendor recommends.

UEFI، GPT، وأقسام MS-DOS

Together with the EFI/UEFI specification, a new style of partitioning arrived:
GPT (GUID Partition Table). This new schema uses globally unique identifiers
(128-bit values displayed in 32 hexadecimal digits) to identify devices and
partition types.

Additionally, the UEFI specification also allows legacy MBR (MS-DOS)
partitions. The Linux boot loaders (ELILO or GRUB2) try to automatically
generate a GUID for those legacy partitions, and write them to the firmware.
Such a GUID can change frequently, causing a rewrite in the firmware. A rewrite
consist of two different operation: removing the old entry and creating a new
entry that replaces the first one.

البرامج الثابتة الحديثة تقوم بتجميع الإدخالات المحذوفة وتحرر الذاكرة من
الإدخالات القديمة. قد تنشأ مشكلة عند وجود خلل في البرامج الثابتة أثناء جمع
وتحرير هذه الإدخالات؛ وهذا قد يتسبب في عدم قدرة النظام على الإقلاع.

الحل بسيط: تحويل قسم MBR القديم إلى GPT جديد لتفادي هذه المشكلة تماما.

الإقلاع عندما تكون في وضع الإقلاع الأمن

هذا يؤثر فقط على الأجهزة في وضع UEFI عند تمكين الإقلاع الآمن.

The new version of the shim loader allows more machines to boot with Secure
Boot enabled than with openSUSE 13.1. Nevertheless, in case of trouble, first
update the BIOS of your machine to the latest version. If the BIOS update does
not help, report the model of your machine to the wiki (http://en.opensuse.org/
openSUSE:UEFI). Then we can track it for the next release.

ترقية النظام

تقني

البيانات المهملة على الشاشة أثناء عملية التثبيت مع سواقة Nouveau

في بعض الأنظمة مع بطاقات NVIDIA، قد يظهر المثبت تشويش في الجزء العلوي من الشاشة
بسبب مشاكل مع برنامج التشغيل الافتراضي nouveau. إذا واجهتك هذه المشكلة، يمكنك
تعطيل الوحدة النمطية kernel nouveau لتشغيل المثبت ومن ثم تمكينها مرة أخرى بعد
تثبيت أو ترقية النظام.

لتعطيل الوحدة النمطية kernel، بمجرد تشغيل وسائط التثبيت، حدد خيار'تثبيت' في
grub ثم اختر 'e' لتحرير المعلمات. ثم اذهب إلى السطر اللذي يبدء بكلمة 'linux'
(or 'linuxefi') وقم بإضافة brokenmodules=nouveau في النهاية. الآن اضغط على
المفتاح F10 لمتابعة الإقلاع مع المعلمات الجديدة. بعد تثبيت النظام، يمكنك إعادة
تمكين' الوحدة النمطية nouveau بتحرير /etc/modprobe.d/50-blacklist.conf وإزالة
الإدخالات اللتي أضفتها.

Information About the FGLRX Driver

For more information about the AMD FGLRX drivers in openSUSE 13.2 and its
status, see https://lizards.opensuse.org/2014/11/01/
fglrx-warning-opensuse-13-2-tumbleweed/.

Second Static Mouse Pointer

If you see two mouse pointers and have two graphic boards, where one is an
Intel board, try uninstalling xf86-video-intel and thus using the other one
only. This will make disappear the static mouse pointer.

This and other issues with the Intel driver like (see http://
bugzilla.opensuse.org/show_bug.cgi?id=901506) will be worked on and, if
possible, addressed with an online update.

Missing Dependencies for virt-manager

If you find a problem executing virt-manager, try installing
typelib-1_0-Gtk-3_0, typelib-1_0-SpiceClientGtk-3_0 and typelib-1_0-GtkVnc-2_0.

In the online update there will be a new version with those dependencies made
explicit.

Modem Authorization After Suspend

openSUSE 13.2 is a more strict in security tha 13.1. If you are connected via a
UMTS or 3G modem and you suspend the machine, the system will ask you for the
root password before reconnecting.

You can change this behavior changing a line in /etc/
polkit-default-privs.standard:

# ModemManager
org.freedesktop.ModemManager.Device.Control    auth_admin:auth_admin:yes


with:

# ModemManager
org.freedesktop.ModemManager.Device.Control    auth_admin_keep


Package Search Missing in GTK UI of YaST

The GTK interface of YaST does not feature a package search box. So if you are
in GNOME or XFCE and you need this feature, use QT interface instead:

sudo /sbin/yast2 --qt

openSUSE pre-13.2 cifstab Migration

Mounting cifs shares at systems start via /etc/samba/cifstab has been
discontinued and obsoleted. Now the generic /etc/fstab handles it.

The migration process requires two steps:

 1. Append all your mount points from /etc/samba/cifstab.rpmsave to /etc/fstab.

 2. Add 0 0 to the end of each new cifs mount line in /etc/fstab.

For more information and examples, see /usr/share/doc/packages/cifs-utils/
README.cifstab.migration in the installed system.

Removing openSUSE 13.1 KDE Wallpaper After Upgrade

If the openSUSE 13.1 KDE Wallpaper still appears after the system upgrade,
remove it from the user cache manually:

rm ~/.kde4/cache-*/plasma-wallpapers/usr/share/wallpapers/openSUSEdefault/contents/images/*

MATE Desktop official integration

The MATE desktop is now officially available under openSUSE 13.2 with MATE
version 1.8.1, the latest stable release. It provides an intuitive and
attractive desktop environment using traditional metaphors for Linux and other
Unix-like operating systems.

The objective, for openSUSE, is to provide the same experience users had when
they used GNOME under openSUSE 11.4, with the main-menu and the Sonar theme.

Slow Start-up in GNOME

GNOME autologin can cause a slow boot process. Probably there is a race between
services not correctly marked to depend on each other. Until the fix will be
available as an online update, a workaround is to temporarily disable the GNOME
autologin feature.

AppArmor and وإعدادات الأذونات

AppArmor is enabled by default. This means more security, but might prevent
services from working if you run them in unexpected ways. If you encounter
strange permission problems, try to switch the AppArmor profile for the
affected service to complain mode with:

aa-complain /usr/bin/$your_service

وضع شكوى الخدمات المتضررة يعني: السماح بكل شيء، وتسجيل الأشياء التي لا تسمح
بها.

Even if it helps, report it as a bug! We want to fix AppArmor profiles to also
cover corner cases.

منوعات

YaST (Qt GUI): "Service Manager" Icon Appears Twice

In the System section of YaST (Qt GUI) the icon Service Manager appears twice.
There is a bug in the Qt version of the YaST Control Center that does not honor
the “hidden” flag in the desktop files.

This will get fixed with the next YaST online update.

مزيد من المعلومات والعتليقات

  • قراءة الملفات التمهيدية على الأقراص المضغوطة.

  • الحصول على معلومات مفصلة بالتغييرات حول مجموعة محددة من الحزم:

    rpm --changelog -qp <FILENAME>.rpm

    <FILENAME> هو اسم الحزم.

  • التحقق من ملف سجل التغيير في المستوى الأعلى من دي في دي للسجل الزمني لكافة
    التغييرات التي تم إجراؤها على الحزم المحدثة.

  • العثور على مزيد من المعلومات في الدليل وثائق على دي في دي.

  • https://activedoc.opensuse.org/ يحتوي على وثائق إضافية أو تحديث.

  • Visit http://www.opensuse.org for the latest product news from openSUSE.

حقوق الطبع والنشر © 2014 SUSE LLC

Thanks for using openSUSE.

The openSUSE Team.

