openSUSE 13.1 Release Notes

Version: 13.1.10 (2014-01-08)

Copyright © 2013 SUSE LLC

A dokumentum szabadon másolható, terjeszthető és/vagy módosítható a Free
Software Foundation által kiadott GNU Free Documentation License 1.2 vagy
ennél újabb verziójának megfelelően, Nem Változtatható rész, Borítószöveg
és Hátlapszöveg nélkül. A licenc angol nyelvű másolata az fdl.txt fájlban
található.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Egyéb
2. Telepítés

    2.1. Részletes telepítési információ

3. Általános

    3.1. openSUSE dokumentáció
    3.2. Dropped YaST Modules
    3.3. UEFI—Unified Extensible Firmware Interface
    3.4. UEFI, GPT, and MS-DOS Partitions
    3.5. Booting When in Secure Boot Mode
    3.6. Adobe Reader (acroread) and Other PDF Readers

4. Rendszerfrissítés

    4.1. Upgrading with Zypper (dup) Requires /etc/fstab Cleanup
    4.2. A SYSLOG_DAEMON változó eltávolításra került
    4.3. Duplicated Network Interfaces

5. Technikai

    5.1. Grafikus megjelenés előkészítése KMS (Kernel Mode Setting)
        használatával
    5.2. Garbage on the Screen During Installation with the Nouveau Driver
    5.3. Samba Version 4.1
    5.4. Postfix beállítása
    5.5. xinetd: Logging to the System Log
    5.6. Apache Version 2.4
    5.7. tomcat: Logging to the System Log
    5.8. Darktable: Refreshing Cache Files Needed
    5.9. Locate: Replacing findutils-locate by mlocate
    5.10. KDE and Bluetooth
    5.11. AppArmor and Permission Settings
    5.12. Skype
    5.13. AutoYaST

Amennyiben egy régebbi verzióról frissít erre az openSUSE kiadásra, akkor
olvassa el a korábbi kiadási megjegyzéseket: http://en.opensuse.org/
openSUSE:Release_Notes

Jelen Kiadási megjegyzés a következő témaköröket érinti:

  o 1. szakasz - Egyéb: Ezek a bejegyzések automatikusan kerültek be az
    openFATE-ről, amely egy funkció- és követelménykezelő rendszer (http://
    features.opensuse.org).

    N/A

  o 2. szakasz - Telepítés: Új telepítéssel kapcsolatos fontos információk.

  o 3. szakasz - Általános: mindenki számára fontos információ.

  o 4. szakasz - Rendszerfrissítés: a korábbi openSUSE verzióról történő
    rendszerfrissítéssel kapcsolatos problémák.

  o 5. szakasz - Technikai: Ebben a részben a tapasztalt felhasználókat
    érintő műszaki változásokról és frissítésekről esik szó.

1. Egyéb

N/A

2. Telepítés

2.1. Részletes telepítési információ

Részletes telepítési információért tekintse meg a 3.1. szakasz - openSUSE
dokumentáció fejezetet.

3. Általános

3.1. openSUSE dokumentáció

A Start-Up kézikönyvben telepítési útmutatót, a KDE és a GNOME asztali
környezettel valamint a LibreOffice irodai programcsomaggal kapcsolatos
leírások találhatók. Ugyanakkor érint néhány alapvető adminisztrációs
területet is, mint a terítés és a szoftverkezelés, valamint foglalkozik a
bash alapjaival is.

Find the documentation in /usr/share/doc/manual/opensuse-manuals_$LANG
after installing the package opensuse-startup_$LANG, or online on http://
doc.opensuse.org.

3.2. Dropped YaST Modules

The following YaST modules were obsolete and rarely used these days:

  o yast2-autofs

  o yast2-dbus-client

  o yast2-dirinstall

  o yast2-fingerprint-reader

  o yast2-irda

  o yast2-mouse

  o yast2-phone-services

  o yast2-power-management

  o yast2-profile-manager

  o yast2-sshd

  o yast2-tv

The main reason for dropping was to decrease the maintenance effort and
better focus on other more used modules.

3.3. UEFI—Unified Extensible Firmware Interface

Prior to installing openSUSE on a system that boots using UEFI (Unified
Extensible Firmware Interface) you are urgently advised to check for any
firmware updates the hardware vendor recommends and, if available, to
install such an update. A pre-installed Windows 8 is a strong indication
that your system boots using UEFI.

Háttér: Néhány UEFI firmware-ben egy olyan hiba található, amely
tönkreteszi, amennyiben túl sok adat kerül kiírásra az UEFI tárterületre.
Azonban senki sem tudja biztosan, hogy pontosan mennyi az a "túl sok". Az
openSUSE igyekszik minimalizálni a kockázatot azzal, hogy csak a rendszer
indításához feltétlenül szükséges információt írja ki az UEFI
tárolóterületre. Ez azt jelenti, hogy ez arra szorítkozik, hogy az UEFI
firmware tudja, mogy merre található az openSUSE rendszertöltő. Az olyan
Linux Kernel funkciók, amelyek arra használják az UEFI tárolóterületet,
hogy betöltéssel és az összeomlásokkal kapcsolatos információkat (pstore)
tároljanak, alapértelmezésként ki vannak kapcsolva. Azonban mindenképpen
javasolt a hardvergyártó által kiadott firmware telepítése.

3.4. UEFI, GPT, and MS-DOS Partitions

Together with the EFI/UEFI specification a new style of partitioning
arrived: GPT (GUID Partition Table). This new schema uses globally unique
identifiers (128-bit values displayed in 32 hexadecimal digits) to identify
devices and partition types.

Additionally, the UEFI specification also allows legacy MBR (MS-DOS)
partitions. The Linux boot loaders (ELILO or GRUB2) try to generate
automatically a GUID for those legacy partitions, and write them to the
firmware. Such a GUID can change frequently, causing a rewrite in the
firmware. A rewrite consist of two different operation: removing the old
entry and creating a new entry that replaces the first one.

Modern firmware has a garbage collector that collects deleted entries and
frees the memory reserved for old entries. A problem arises when faulty
firmware does not collect and free those entries; this may end up with a
non-bootable system.

The workaround is simple: convert the legacy MBR partition to the new GPT
to avoid this problem completely.

3.5. Booting When in Secure Boot Mode

Ez olyan gépeken fordul elő, amely UEFI módot használ és a biztonságos mód
engedélyezve van.

The new version of the shim loader allows more machines to boot with Secure
Boot enabled than with openSUSE 12.3. Nevertheless, in case of trouble,
first update the BIOS of your machine to the latest version. If the BIOS
update does not help, report the model of your machine it the wiki (http://
en.opensuse.org/openSUSE:UEFI). Then we can track it for the next release.

3.6. Adobe Reader (acroread) and Other PDF Readers

Adobe no longer provides (security) updates for Adobe Reader (acroread).
Therefore the acroread package was dropped from the distribution to protect
openSUSE users.

openSUSE includes various PDF viewing tools like Okular, Evince, and
poppler-tools. These tools are actively maintained and get security fixes
from openSUSE and their upstream authors.

For more information, see http://en.opensuse.org/Adobe_Reader.

4. Rendszerfrissítés

4.1. Upgrading with Zypper (dup) Requires /etc/fstab Cleanup

When upgrading with zypper dup (YaST upgrade handles it automatically)
users should remove the following /etc/fstab entries if present:

tmpfs   /dev/shm
devpts  /dev/pts
sysfs   /sys sysfs
proc    /proc proc

This is especially important for Gnome users, otherwise the Gnome terminal
will fail with "grantpt failed: Operation not permitted". These mount
points are managed by systemd and should no longer be present in /etc/
fstab.

4.2. A SYSLOG_DAEMON változó eltávolításra került

A SYSLOG_DAEMON változó eltávolításra került. Korábban ennek segítségével a
syslog démon kiválasztására szolgált. Az openSUSE 12.3 után azonban
egyszerre csak egy syslog implementáció telepíthető a rendszerre és ez
automatikusan kiválasztásra kerül.

További részletek a syslog(8) manoldalon találhatók.

4.3. Duplicated Network Interfaces

The current version of systemd uses a new convention for assigning
predictable names to network interfaces. YaST is changed accordingly.

Some reports indicate a bug in YaST when conversion from one naming scheme
to another takes place. If the same network interface has two different
names, you have been hit by this bug. In this case remove the different
network interfaces in /etc/sysconfig/network and use YaST to configure the
network anew.

For more information about predictable network interface names, see http://
www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/systemd/PredictableNetworkInterfaceNames/
.

5. Technikai

5.1. Grafikus megjelenés előkészítése KMS (Kernel Mode Setting)
használatával

Az openSUSE 11.3 megjelenésével, a KMS (Kernel Mode Setting) lett az
alapértelmezett az Intel, ATI és NVIDIA grafikus kártyák számára.
Amennyiben valamilyen probléma merül fel a KMS illesztőprogram
támogatásával kapcsolatban (intel, radeon, nouveau), akkor tiltsa le a
nomodeset kernelbetöltő parancs segítségével. Ennek tartós beállításához
adja hozza a kernelparamétert a /boot/grub/menu.lst fájlhoz. A beállítás
segítségével az adott kernelmodul (intel, radeon, nouveau) a modeset=0
beállítással töltődik be az initrd-be, pl. így a KMS letiltásra kerül.

sudo /usr/sbin/grub2-mkconfig --output=/boot/grub2/grub.cfg

Az openSUSE 11.3 megjelenésével, a KMS (Kernel Mode Setting) lett az
alapértelmezett az Intel, ATI és NVIDIA grafikus kártyák számára.
Amennyiben valamilyen probléma merül fel a KMS illesztőprogram
támogatásával kapcsolatban (intel, radeon, nouveau), akkor tiltsa le a
nomodeset kernelbetöltő parancs segítségével. Ennek tartós beállításához
adja hozza a kernelparamétert a /boot/grub/menu.lst fájlhoz. A beállítás
segítségével az adott kernelmodul (intel, radeon, nouveau) a modeset=0
beállítással töltődik be az initrd-be, pl. így a KMS letiltásra kerül.

Azokban a ritka esetekben, amikor a DRM-modul az initrd fájlból töltődik
be, az egy általános probléma és nincsen köze a KMS-hez. Lehetőség van arra
is, hogy initrd fájlból való betöltés teljes mértékben letiltásra kerüljön.
Ehhez a YaST-ban meg kell adni a NO_KMS_IN_INITRD sysconfig változóhoz a
yes értéket, amely ezt követően újra létrehozza az initrd-t. Indítsa újra a
gépet.

Intel gépeken KMS nélkül az Xserver visszaáll fbdev illesztőprogramra (az
intel illesztőprogram csak a KMS-t támogatja). Alternatívaként, a régebbi
Intel videókártyákhoz létezik egy "intellegacy" illesztőprogram
(xorg-x11-driver-video-intel-legacy csomag), amely támogatja az UMS-t (User
Mode Setting). Ennek használatához a /etc/X11/xorg.conf.d/50-device.conf
fájlban módosítani kell az illesztőprogram bejegyzést intellegacy értékre.

Az ATI-nál a mostani GPU-k visszaállnak a radeonhd használatára. Az NVIDIA
KMS nélküli használatakor az nv illesztőprogram kerül felhasználásra (a
nouveau illesztőprogram csak a KMS-t támogatja). Az újabb ATI és NVIDIA
grafikuskártyák fbdev használatára állnak vissza, amennyiben a nomodeset
kernelparaméter van megadva.

5.2. Garbage on the Screen During Installation with the Nouveau Driver

On some systems with NVIDIA cards, the installer may show garbage on the
top part of the screen due to problems with the default nouveau driver. If
you are affected by this problem, you can disable the nouveau kernel module
to run the installer and then enable it again once the system is installed
or upgraded.

To disable the kernel module, once you boot from the installation media,
select the 'Installation' entry in grub and press 'e' to edit the
parameters. Then go to the line starting with 'linux' (or 'linuxefi') and
add brokenmodules=nouveau at the end. Now press F10 to continue booting
with the new parameter. After the system is installed, you can re-enable
the nouveau module by editing /etc/modprobe.d/50-blacklist.conf and
removing the entry that blacklists nouveau.

5.3. Samba Version 4.1

Samba version 4.1 shipped with openSUSE 13.1 does not include support to
operate as an Active Directory style domain controller. This functionality
is currently disabled, as it lacks integration with system-wide MIT
Kerberos.

5.4. Postfix beállítása

With openSUSE 12.3, SuSEconfig.postfix was renamed as /usr/sbin/
config.postfix. If you set sysconfig variables in /etc/sysconfig/postfix or
/etc/sysconfig/mail, you must manually run /usr/sbin/config.postfix as
root.

5.5. xinetd: Logging to the System Log

The new default for xinetd changes the default target for logging from /var
/log/xinetd.log to the system log. This means all messages from xinetd will
appear in a system log as a facility daemon and log level info.

If you want to switch back the the old way, find a proper snippet in /etc/
xinetd.conf. The template for the logrotate script for xinetd.log can be
found in /usr/share/doc/packages/xinetd/logrotate.

5.6. Apache Version 2.4

Apache 2.4 features various changes in the configuration files. For more
information about upgrading from a previous version, see http://
httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/upgrading.html.

5.7. tomcat: Logging to the System Log

The tomcat startup scripts doe no longer write the output to /var/log/
tomcat/catalina.out. All messages are now redirected to the system log via
tomcat.service (tomcat-jsvc.service) and log level info.

5.8. Darktable: Refreshing Cache Files Needed

If upgrading from a previous release to openSUSE 13.1 old cache files may
no longer work. In this case removing ~/.cache/darktable/mipmaps is
necessary.

5.9. Locate: Replacing findutils-locate by mlocate

The mlocate tool is the replacement for findutils-locate. In the default
configuration mlocate behave the same as findutils-locate. Because of an
improved permission handling, it could take up to 24 hours, until the
database file will become available to regular users.

In case you encounter a "Permission denied" message shortly after
installing mlocate, run

/etc/cron.daily/mlocate.cron

as root once.

5.10. KDE and Bluetooth

The Bluetooth stack is provided by Bluez 5 (a major, backwards-incompatbile
version), a necessary upgrade for GNOME desktop and some other components
of the base system. Unfortunately, the KDE workspace only supports Bluez
version 4 in its currently-released versions.

Therefore, the openSUSE KDE community team offers an unofficial Bluedevil
package providing at least basic functionality such as device pairing or
support for bluetooth mice; Some other features are known not to work jet,
like file transfer.

For the moment, bugs should not be filed against Bluetooth support in KDE
as the Bluez 5 port of Bluedevil is still ongoing.

5.11. AppArmor and Permission Settings

AppArmor is enabled by default. This means more security, but might prevent
services from working, if you run them in unexpected ways. If you encounter
strange permission problems, try to switch the AppArmor profile for the
affected service to complain mode with:

aa-complain /usr/bin/$your_service

Complain mode means: allow everything, and log things that the profile
would not allow.

Even if it helps report it as a bug! We want to fix AppArmor profiles to
cover also corner cases.

5.12. Skype

PulseAudio 4.0 exposes a bug in the current version of Skype for Linux
(v4.2). Until Skype is fixed and updated, run skype from the command line:

PULSE_LATENCY_MSEC=60 skype

For more information about this bug, see http://arunraghavan.net/2013/08/
pulseaudio-4-0-and-skype/.

5.13. AutoYaST

If the autoyast profile contains entries in an <add-on> section there is a
bug triggered that prevents information in the profile from being
transferred from the first stage into the second stage. Therefore, in this
case all second stage configuration steps are skipped, which normally leads
to more or less completely unusable installations.

As a temporary workaround, avoid using <add-on> sections in profiles with
AutoYaST in openSUSE 13.1.

